---
title: LDR or Photoresistor
date: 2020-08-23
feature_text: |
  ### Project 5

feature_image: https://1.bp.blogspot.com/--LrzzHcQ2cY/XHXEgPWHN6I/AAAAAAAAC68/f8sokzVFYg8zZ0DVZuxx-R9_1jcACZAAwCKgBGAs/w3840-h1080-p-k-no-nu/mountain-night-scenery-stars-landscape-anime-4K-84.jpg

categories:
- Arduino Projects
excerpt: Project 5


---
### Introduction
Hey Guys! I hope all of you are doing really great!
Today i'll be showing you how to use a LDR or Photoresistor in order to turn LED ON or OFF according to the Light around. It is the basic concept Used
in smart lights.
Note: If you are new to IOT and don't know anything about programming or Hardware, these Blogs are for you as i'll be starting from very basic and
will be explaining everything. So all you need is an urge to learn!

### Modules Used:

{% include figure.html image="/images/proj5/IMG_20200823_14955.jpg" alt="Image with just alt text" %}

- A Platform for the software End. Laptop, PC etc. with Arduino IDE <link> installed.
- An Arduino (Arduino UNO R3 suggested)    http://tinkercad.com/join
- USB cable to power Arduino
- Four Jumper wires for connection
- Breadboard
- Photoresistor/LDR
- One LED
- A 220ohms resistor and a 10K ohms resistor


Got everything? Okay! We're good to go.

### Components Explanation:
Before we start with the assembly of the Hardware, it's better to understand the use of the components.

_Breadboard_ is a device used for making temporary connections with Arduino. It is used to avoid soldering. Breadboard's interface is really easy to understand and use. It is divided into three parts. The leftmost and rightmost portions consist of two vertical columns each, with many holes which are connected to each other. That means if we connect one hole of that row to power, the whole vertical row gets connected to power.
These holes are labelled as '+' and '-'. Generally the '+' sign row, marked with red is used for providing power to the components and the '-' sign row, marked with blue is used for grounding the components.
> Note: Grounding/Earthing connects the components to Earth's Surface in order to prevent shock or overflow of current.

The middle portion consists of horizontal rows with holes in a group of five, which are connected to each other. That means if we
connect one hole of that group to certain pin on Arduino, the whole horizontal group of five gets connected to it.

_USB wire_ is used to power the Arduino. We can also use a power adapter but for our project, power supply through USB is enough.
_Jumper wires_ are used to connect the components. _Resistor_ is used for reducing the current flow by causing resistance to the flow. It is used to prevent our LED from burning in the case of
excess current flow.
_Photoresistor_ or LDR(Light Dependent Resistor) is a device with a variable resistant which is used to detect light intensity
falling on it's sensitive surface. So in this example, if the light intensity is High or Low, then it will change it's resistance
accordingly to control the LED.

LED will be a output in this example. LED has two legs, one of them is shorter than other. The shorter one is called _Cathode_
(negative) and the longer one is called _Anode_ (positive). The current flows from Anode to Cathode, therefore orientation
of the LED is important.


### Hardware Assembly:

Now, let's start with assembling the Hardware:

{% include figure.html image="/images/proj5/IMG_20200823_175235.jpg" alt="Image with just alt text" %}

- Firstly connect LDR to the Breadboard

{% include figure.html image="/images/proj5/IMG_20200823_175353.jpg" alt="Image with just alt text" %}

- Now take a jumper wire. Connect it's one end to the analog Pin A0 on the Arduino and other end to first leg of LDR

{% include figure.html image="/images/proj5/IMG_20200823_175450.jpg" alt="Image with just alt text" %}

- Take another jumper wire. Connect it's one end to the 5V power pin on the Arduino and other end to second leg of LDR

{% include figure.html image="/images/proj5/IMG_20200823_175529.jpg" alt="Image with just alt text" %}

- Take a 10K ohms resistor and insert it's one leg to that group of holes to which analog jumper wire is connected and insert
the other leg to any other group pf holes.

{% include figure.html image="/images/proj5/IMG_20200823_175619.jpg" alt="Image with just alt text" %}

- Take a jumper wire and connect it's one end to Resistor and other end to Ground pin on the Arduino

{% include figure.html image="/images/proj5/IMG_20200823_175712.jpg" alt="Image with just alt text" %}

- Now take a LED and conect it to any horizontal group of holes

{% include figure.html image="/images/proj5/IMG_20200823_175752.jpg" alt="Image with just alt text" %}

- Take a jumper wire. Connect it's one end to the PIN13 on the Arduino and other end to Anode(longer) leg of the Arduino

{% include figure.html image="/images/proj5/IMG_20200823_175825.jpg" alt="Image with just alt text" %}

- Take a 220ohms resistor and connect it to Cathode(shorter) leg of the LED

{% include figure.html image="/images/proj5/IMG_20200823_175925.jpg" alt="Image with just alt text" %}

- Lastly take a jumper wire and connect it's one to the ground pin on the Arduino and other end to the Resistor



### Hardware Explanation:

As the 10Kohms resistor and  one leg of the LDR are in the same group of horizontal holes, therefore they
get connected. And as the resistor is grounded, the LDR is protected from any excess current.
Now the jumper wire connected to Pin A0 on the Arduino and  one leg of LDR are in the same group of horizontal holes, therefore they
get connected. Therefore pin A0 will be used for any INPUT from the LDR.

Now the jumper connected to Pin 5V on the Arduino and another leg of LDR are in the same group of horizontal holes, therefore they
get connected. Therefore it provides 5V power supply to the LDR.

The Cathode leg of the LED and 220ohms resistor are in same group of horizontal holes, therefore they get connected.
As Jumper wire connected to ground pin on the Arduino and the resistor are in the same group of holes, they get connected.
And as the resistor is grounded, the LED is protected from any excess current.

Now as the Anode leg of the LED and jumper wire connected to pin13 are in same group of holes, they get connected.
Therefore any action performed on this pin will get displayed on the LED.


As the assembly of hardware is done, now it's time for writing the program and uploading it to the Arduino.
> Note: For programming the Arduino, C/C++ language is used. If you don't know anything about C, just make sure to pay more
attention to it. I've explained the code and also added comments within the program for better understanding.

### Program:

```c

const int led = 13;
const int ldr = A0;
int ldr_status = 0;

void setup(){
  Serial.begin(9600);
  Serial.print("Welcome to the Serial Monitor\n Printing Status of the LED:");
  pinMode(led, OUTPUT);
  pinMode(ldr, INPUT);
  Serial.println();
}

void loop()
{
  ldr_status = analogRead(ldr);

  if(ldr_status <= 300){
    digitalWrite(led, HIGH);
    Serial.println("DARK: LED is ON++");
    delay(100);
  }

  else{
    digitalWrite(led, LOW);
    Serial.println("BRIGHT: LED is OFF--");
    delay(100);
  }
}

```


### Program Explanantion:

{% include figure.html image="/images/proj5/carbon.png" alt="Image with just alt text" %}

In C language, the first step is to declare the constant or variables that we are going to use in the program.
Here, by using 'const int led = 13;' we declare that "led" is an integer with a constant value 13, which is our desired output pin on the Arduino.
'const int ldr = A0;' we declare that "ldr" is an integer with a constant value A0, which is our desired input pin on the Arduino.
'int ldr_status = 0;' declares that "ldr_status" is an integer with a variable value.
> Note: Here i've specifically mentioned 'const' as buttonStatus is variable

'ldr_status' is just a variable for storing the status of the LDR i.e. storing the value that whether it is dark or bright

Now, in Arduino sketch the "void setup" and "void loop" are the two main functions which are mandatory for every Arduino
sketch.
The curly brackets '{}' after any statement is used to define a clear scope and is also used to group statements for better
understanding.
(Note: An open curly bracket must always be closed after grouping the statements)
The 'Setup' function is only executed once at the beginning of the program and the 'loop' function executes repeatedly.
The term 'void' here is used to signify that these functions do not return anything and they don't take any arguments.
(Note: Argument is as a value provided to the function whenever we call it. They are passed inside the bracket '()' by the function).

Now the function 'Serial.begin(9600);' is used to start the Serial monitor, where 9600 is the Baud Rate i.e. exchanging data at 9600 bits per second.
There can be different baud rates but 9600 is the most common baud rate.
Now the function 'Serial.print("Welcome to the Serial Monitor\n Printing Status of the LED:");' is used to print something to the Serial Monitor.
Anything inside the inverted commas "" gets printed.
> Note: '\n' is used to add another line. Therefore anything after \n is printed in the other line.
The function 'pinMode' is used to declare an INPUT or OUTPUT. The function 'pinMode(led, OUTPUT);' declares OUTPUT at the pin13.
The function 'pinMode(ldr, INPUT);' declares INPUT at analog pin A0.

The function 'Serial.println();' is used to leave a line before printing anything else.

Now the function 'ldr_status = analogRead(ldr);' is used to read the analog value of ldr i.e. light falling on ldr at pin A0 and store it to the variable
'ldr_status'.

Now the 'if' and 'else' are conditional statements. According to which if it returns TRUE, the following statements gets printed and if it returns false, we
move on to 'else' statement and check it.
Therefore, 'if(ldr_status <= 300){' basically states that if the value of pin A0 stored into ldr_status is less than or equal to 300, then execute the
following statements mentioned in the curly brackets.

Now the function 'digitalWrite(led, HIGH);' makes the LED on pin13, HIGH i.e. Turn ON.
And when the LED is ON, 'Serial.println("DARK: LED is ON++");' prints "DARK: LED is ON++" to the Serial Monitor.
Then the 'delay(100);' holds the above message for 100 miliseconds before printing another message.

Now if the "if" statement is found to be false, 'digitalWrite(led, LOW);' gets executed which basically makes the LED on pin13, LOW i.e. Turn OFF.
And ' Serial.println("BRIGHT: LED is OFF--");' prints "BRIGHT: LED is OFF--" to the Serial Monitor.
Then the 'delay(100);' holds the above message for 100 miliseconds before printing another message.

You might be wondering that what is the use of a semicolon ';' after every piece of code. Well, in C/C++ semicolon acts as
a Terminator and it used to tell the compiler that we have reached the end of the command. Semicolon at the end of a command is mandatory in
C/C++ language.



**Now** we are done with our Program and Hardware. It's time to upload the sketch to the Arduino.
- Use the USB cable provided with Arduino to connect it with the PC.
- Use 'Upload' to verify and upload the sketch to the Arduino.

> Note: If you get any errors while compiling the sketch, just make sure the Arduino is connected correctly to the PC and
the 'board' & 'port' is specified in the tools menu. Also check for any errors in the code itself, especially look for
unclosed curly brackets or missing semicolons at the end of the statements.

{% include video.html id="F1sxHeRzZsM" title="LDR/Photoresistor example" %}

Once the program is successfully verified and uploaded to the Arduino we will see a 'Done Uploading' message at the
bottom of the screen and the LED starts turning ON or OFF according to the Light.


### Conclusion:
In this blog we learnt how to use a LDR/Photoresistor
This was just a basic Example; We will keep stepping up. So for many more such projects, stay tuned!


#### Thank You!
<br>
<small> Share on: </small>
<br>
{% include social-share.html %}
